# Steinbrückenhöhle 1623/204

## Entrance and The Near End passages

The Near End series consists of those passages on the level
of the bottom of the 204a/b entrance pitches. It communicates with the
[mid-level series](midlevel.html) via either Thread Pitch or Pendulum
Pitch, while a side passage leads to a pitch dropping into [\'King
Carbide](nopain.html#kingcarbide), off No Pain No Gain. Alternatively,
in 2006 a link ([Death or Glory](#deathglory)) was discovered leading
from the Near End to the [Colonnade](treeumphant.html#thecolonnade)).

## Entrance

[![204a entrance](t/enta.jpg){.onleft}](l/enta.html) [![204a
entrance](t/1en.jpg){.onleft}](l/1en.html) [![204b
entrance](t/13sle.jpg){.onleft}](l/13sle.html) The 204a entrance is
directly opposite a 10m x 5m [stone bridge](bridge.html) from which it
derives its name. The entrance itself is approximately 8m high and 5m
wide, and leads down a boulder slope and round a right hand bend to the
top of the first pitch. The 204b entrance is 15m away to the north; this
was used in 1999, but involves a rather shoddy sloping descent down a
gully, so in recent years the 204a entrance has been used.

## First Pitch

[![First Pitch](t/2p1.jpg){.onright}](l/2p1.html) The 204a entrance
leads, via a short climb down, to a ledge overlooking the first pitch,
**Trick or Treat**. This is rigged with a traverse line and a Y-hang in
the roof, giving a superb and very airy free-hang to the bottom. The
landing is by a large snow plug with an ice corridor round the
right-hand edge leading to the top of a boulder slope. A rift passage on
the right becomes too tight.

The snow level varies: in 2000 it was much higher than in 1999,
rendering the original route onward impassable (see [here](#route1999)).
A revised route was explored, which was the main route in 2001. In 2002
and 2003 the snow was lower again, and the original route was back in
use.

## Second and Third Pitches

Descending the boulder slope (care required to avoid kicking rocks off)
leads to the head of the second pitch, **Jim\'ll Fix It** (18m in 1999
but only about 10m in 2000/2001 due to increased snow levels). An
unexplored passage is visible from the pitch head, which could be
accessed by a bolt traverse round the right hand side of the pitch head
\[[C1999-204-01 C](qm.html#C1999-204-01){#qC1999-204-01}\] (explored by
Brian?). The pitch is rigged from a bolt in the left hand wall with a
deviation from a spit immediately after the pitch head bolt. This
protects a marginal rub point and also avoids a jet of water which
spurts from a crack in the wall after heavy rain.

If the snow level is high, one lands directly on the snow plug.
Following the wall around to the right (facing the wall on which the
pitch is rigged) leads to a 2m climb into a rift, which quickly descends
to the head of the impressive third pitch, [**Stitch This**]{#stitch}
(30m). A Y-hang rebelay on the left wall is shortly followed by a
deviation from the opposite side of the shaft to obtain a free-hang into
[Wolpertinger Way](midlevel.html#wolp). This pitch is in fact an
(upwards) continuation of **[Thread Pitch](#thread)**.

## Low snow route

In 1999, 2002 and 2003, the snow plug was much smaller and it was
possible to complete the descent to the floor, landing in a sloping
phreatic passage. There are two ways on: Right leads uphill as
stooping/crawling height passage for 30m to emerge at the top of
[Umshitshimbo](#umshit). Left leads downhill into [The Near
End](#nearend) and is the main way on. There is a further unexplored
passage in the wall above the gap between the snow plug and the rock
\[[C1999-204-03 C](qm.html#C1999-204-03){#qC1999-204-03}\].

## The Near End

[![Third Pitch](t/5p3.jpg){.onright}](l/5p3.html) **The Near End** is a
collective name for a complex network of high level phreatic passages
which slope approximately 20 degres following the dip of the beds.
Heading downhill from the base of [Jim\'ll Fix It](#jim) in a stooping
height passage leads round a double bend to a 2m climb down to a
junction. Right leads to more [side passages](#nearside) whilst the main
route is straight ahead to a crossroads. Right leads into the same [side
passages](#nearside) as the previous right turn. Left is **[Needle
Crawl]{#needle}** past an unexplored passage on the left \[[C1999-204-04
C](qm.html#C1999-204-04){#qC1999-204-04}\] and a crawl on the right
(feels like straight ahead) which becomes too small after \~8m. Straight
ahead (feels like a left) leads to the head of a fine 4m diameter
circular shaft, **[Thread Pitch]{#thread}**. This pitch of 17m
corresponds to the lower half of [Stitch This](#stitch), and leads into
[Wolpertinger Way](midlevel.html#wolp). A continuation of the crawl is
visible at the opposite side of the pitch head; this is choked after 5m
or so.

From the crossroads, the main route in 1999 was straight ahead, downhill
in mostly stooping height passage with a short section of sandy
crawling. After 15m is a short climb down to the top of a 4m deep pit
with a too-tight passage at the bottom, with the phreatic passage
continuing to the right. After a further 10m the passage is intersected
by a large rift with a big rock partially blocking the passage. Climbing
up to the right leads back into a tall rift in the [side
passages](#nearside). A climb up to the left leads to a passage
containing attractive white mud which was not entered, however a visual
connection to the [Pendulum Pitch](midlevel.html#pendulum) was
established.

Straight ahead leads to a further junction after 15m. Left opens out to
the head of [Pendulum Pitch](midlevel.html#pendulum), the main route to
the bottom of [Wolpertinger Way](midlevel.html#wolp) used in 1999. Right
leads to a narrow stooping height passage which continues for 25m with
several clear pools in the floor to a widening. Around the widening,
most routes ahead and to the left are choked with boulders. There are
two ways on. On the left-hand side is a small awkward chamber, from
which a short pitch leads into [\'King
Carbide](nopain.html#kingcarbide). On the right, crawling up over
unpleasant sharp mobile boulders leads to a body sized tube sloping
slightly upwards. After around 15m it twists left to land in a muddy
puddle at a slight widening in the passage, which continues for another
3m or so to a low chamber, **[Kidney Bean]{#kidneybean}**, possibly an
enlarged bedding plane. A hole in the floor in the chamber is blind. At
the northern end of the chamber is a narrow crawl; this connects with a
wider crawling passage leading off from a junction at the end of the
body-sized tube. The combined passage enlarges to stooping size and
continues past old gour pools to a low mud squeeze. This was passed in
2006 after some excavation to emerge in a low bedding chamber, **[Death
Or Glory]{#deathglory}**. Straight ahead is a horrendous boulder choke
(Death), with a propensity to drop large rocks on people. Slightly to
the right of this is a narrow crawl with a hole in the floor; this is a
3m chimney climb down (Glory), emerging in [Waterfall
Chamber](treeumphant.html#waterfall) at the end of the Colonnade. Back
in the bedding chamber, one can crawl up to the right to a junction with
several small tubes, all of which are too tight.

## The Near End: Side Passages

The first two right turns encountered when heading downhill from the
foot of [Jim\'ll Fix It](#jim) unite in a walking sized passage. After
10m the bottom of [Umshitshimbo](#umshit) is passed on the right, whilst
straight ahead leads to a junction with a large keyhole passage. Left
leads after 15m to a climb up behind a precariously placed boulder, to
an immediate climb down of 4m which emerges in the 1999 main route
through the near end before [Pendulum Pitch](midlevel.html#pendulum).
Right leads immediately to a 8m pitch. A difficult and exposed traverse
round the left hand wall leads to a further 30m of passage with a
steadily lowering roof culminating in a boulder choke.

## The Near End: Umshitshimbo and Updip Passages

**Umshitshimbo** is a fine phreatic ramp, 2m wide and about 4m high,
which heads uphill in a straight line for 40m. At the top a passage
doubling back on the right leads back to the base of [Jim\'ll Fix
It](#jim) and there is a climb up into a rift passage heading south over
the top of Umshitshimbo which becomes too narrow. Large passage
continues uphill past a 2m deep blind pit on the right to a junction.

Left leads uphill past a choked inlet on the left to a steep uphill
section with a crawl on the right, which leads shortly to a 2m climb
down and immediate choke. At the top of the steep section the passage to
the right immediately chokes, whilst left is **[Dolly Parton
Climb]{#parton}**, a 2m climb up with huge jugs, to a further 15m of
upward trending phreatic passage, terminating in a boulder choke with a
slight draught (air coming into the cave). There are two small steep
phreatic ramps on the left hand side of this passage, both very small
and both choked.

Straight ahead at the junction leads through a short section of rift to
an enlargement with an alcove on the right and a keyhole passage ahead.
The rift section at the bottom quickly becomes choked, with a slight
draught coming in. A 3m climb gains access to the phreatic section which
goes over the top of the choke, and about after a further 3m reaches a
large boulder, which almost blocks the passage with a strong breeze
blowing through the gap (into the cave.) Squeezing through yields a
steeply ascending rocky crawl which chokes after about 5m.
